![image5](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/1d9d2f3c-cb43-4e53-b294-707ec24b5892)![image4](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/856ce7f7-07d0-473b-8209-5ee0c248ab3a)![image3](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/de8f7dcb-3316-4f41-9689-c463c8cfeecd)![image2](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/bc23cddc-9cc1-4a5f-aa55-63558fbe0be5)![image1](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/471c3e80-836f-47ff-a8c4-a2acc9d3c10f)**Project Synopsis**

**Train Scheduling System using Heap Queue**

The **Train Scheduling System using Heap Queue** is designed to optimize
train operations by efficiently managing the allocation of railway
tracks for arriving and departing trains. The system uses a heap-based
priority queue, ensuring trains are scheduled based on key factors such
as arrival time, train type (e.g., express, passenger, freight), and
priority. The heap structure ensures efficient, quick access to the
highest-priority train, enabling dynamic scheduling adjustments in
real-time.

### **Problem Domain for Train Scheduling System Using Heap Queue**

The problem domain for a **Train Scheduling System using Heap Queue**
revolves around managing the efficient operation of trains within a
railway network. The main objective is to ensure timely arrivals,
departures, and optimal use of tracks. The key challenges include:

1.  **Train Allocation**: Efficiently assigning limited railway tracks
     to multiple trains with varying schedules and ensuring no
     conflicts arise.

2.  **Prioritization**: Handling different types of trains (express,
     local, freight, emergency) by prioritizing them based on criteria
     like arrival time, train type, and priority levels.

In this problem domain, the **heap-based priority queue** plays a
crucial role by ensuring trains are processed in the most efficient
order. The heap structure allows fast scheduling adjustments, ensuring
smooth operation even as new data is received.

### 

### 

### **Solution Domain**

The solution domain for a **Train Scheduling System using Heap Queue**
focuses on implementing a **heap-based priority queue** to manage train
schedules effectively within a railway network. The heap queue ensures
that trains with the highest priority, based on arrival time and type,
are allocated tracks first. By minimizing delays and optimizing track
allocation, the system ensures smooth and timely operations.

### **Software Used**

-   **Backend Server**: Django (Python Web Framework)

-   **Data Structure**: **Heap Queue** (using Python's built-in heapq library)

-   **Frontend**: HTML, CSS, JavaScript

### **Methodology**

The methodology for implementing the **Train Scheduling System** using a
heap queue involves several steps to ensure efficient scheduling,
prioritization, and conflict resolution:

1.  **Requirement Analysis and Design**: In this phase, functional and
     non-functional requirements are identified, such as real-time
     updates, dynamic adjustments for delays, and efficient train
     scheduling. The database schema, user interface design, and
     priority queue structure are also defined to ensure smooth
     operation.

2.  **Backend Development (Django)**: Django is used to manage the
     backend logic. The system defines models for trains, tracks, and
     schedules. The **heapq** module is used for implementing the
     heap-based priority queue to prioritize trains. Django handles
     core functionalities such as adding, modifying, and removing
     schedules. Additionally, the **Django Admin Panel** is used for
     managing train schedules, and real-time logs of train movements
     across multiple stations are displayed.

3.  **Frontend Development (HTML, CSS, JavaScript)**: HTML structures
     the user interface, and CSS ensures responsive design across
     various devices. JavaScript dynamically fetches data from the
     backend, updating the priority queue and track availability in
     real-time.

### **Outcomes**

-   **Efficient Train Scheduling**: The system effectively prioritizes
     trains using a heap-based priority queue, ensuring high-priority
     trains are scheduled first, minimizing delays.

-   **Optimized Resource Allocation**: Tracks are allocated dynamically,
     and the scheduling system is capable of adjusting in real-time to
     accommodate changes such as delays or emergencies.


![image1](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/63d370d4-359d-4818-8e3b-ec3e73b71a16)
![image2](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b3531a8e-e75a-47e8-b881-f88189d56551)
![image3](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/348c8d4d-842b-49d3-b607-8b147337bd9d)
![image4](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/35f5c4b0-3be8-48db-9cc7-3aa779cced3e)
![image5](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/90dc9bb3-a549-49cf-a65c-49c12e81c5b1)
![image6](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/88ee7849-0c81-400a-ada4-408702e1b554)


